📝 Add migration guide for Markdown to MDX conversion (#3512)
tinacms/tina.io: content/docs/guides/converting-md-to-mdx.mdx

---

> title: Converting Gatsby Markdown to MDX for TinaCMS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Markdown to MDX migration guide
```
This guidance could work for any markdown, not just Gatsby. Also, the title could be confusing given that there is a Gatsby migration guide already.

last_edited: '2025-06-24T16:04:02.886Z'
next: content/docs/cli-overview.mdx
previous: content/docs/guides/converting-gatsby-to-tina.mdx
---

## Introduction

As part of the **SSW Rules Migration** project, we transitioned our site from **Gatsby + Netlify CMS** to **Next.js + TinaCMS**. One of the main technical hurdles was converting a large number of Markdown (`.md`) files into MDX (`.mdx`) to enable interactive components supported by TinaCMS.

To streamline this process, we built a flexible Python script that parses Markdown files, identifies custom content blocks, and transforms them into MDX-compatible React components.

> This guide walks through the approach we took, and how to use the script.

Author: ✅ Done

> ## Key Migration Challenges
> 
> * Many Markdown files used custom content formats (e.g. YouTube, greyboxes, email templates).
> * We relied on Gatsby plugins to render certain elements—those weren’t compatible with MDX out of the box.
> * MDX requires JSX-like syntax, which meant we couldn’t reuse raw HTML or plugin shortcodes directly.
> * Manually converting each file would have been time-consuming and error-prone.
> 
> ## How We Approached It
> 
> We wrote a modular Python script that:
> 
> * Recursively scans all Markdown files.
> * Uses regular expressions to detect custom block formats.
> * Replaces them with the appropriate MDX components.
> * Cleans up legacy tags (like `<!--endintro-->`) and other formatting artifacts.
> * Generates a new .mdx file for each original Markdown file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Key Migration Challenges

- Legacy shortcodes and custom syntax not MDX-compatible
- MDX requires valid JSX — raw HTML and plugins won’t work
- Markdown plugins are not portable
- Manual conversion is slow and error-prone

## Script Overview

We built a Python script that:

- Recursively scans .md files
- Detects custom blocks using regex
- Replaces each with JSX components
- Cleans up formatting artifacts (e.g. <!--endintro-->)
- Outputs .mdx files

```

## Block Types We Support

> Here are the key Markdown patterns our script handles:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are the key Markdown patterns our script handles (some of these are unique to the project it was developed for):
```

**Before (Markdown):**

```
::: email-template  
| | |
| -------- | --- |
| To: | XXX |
| Cc: | YYY |
| Bcc: | ZZZ |
| Subject: | {{ EMAIL SUBJECT }} |  
::: email-content
### Hi XXX,
{{ EMAIL CONTENT }}
:::  
:::  
::: good  
Figure: Good example - Nice email template  
:::

::: good
![Figure: Well-structured diagram](diagram.png)
:::

`youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dQw4w9WgXcQ`
**Watch this classic hit**

```

**After (MDX):**

```jsx

<emailEmbed
  from=""
  to="XXX"
  cc="YYY"
  bcc="ZZZ"
  subject="&#123;&#123; EMAIL SUBJECT &#125;&#125;"
  body={<>
    ## Hi XXX,
&#123;&#123; EMAIL CONTENT &#125;&#125;
  </>}
  figureEmbed={{
    preset: "goodExample",
    figure: "Good example - Nice email template",
    shouldDisplay: true
  }}
/>

<imageEmbed
  alt="Image"
  size="large"
  showBorder={true}
  figureEmbed={{
    preset: "goodExample",
    figure: 'Well-structured diagram',
    shouldDisplay: true
  }}
  src="diagram.png"
/>

<youtubeEmbed url="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dQw4w9WgXcQ" description="Watch this classic hit" />

```

## Running the Script

To convert a single file:

```bash
python convert_md_to_mdx.py path/to/rule.md
```

> To convert all files in your project:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To convert all files:
```

```bash
python convert_md_to_mdx.py
```

> Once the conversion is done, start your local TinaCMS site and browse the converted pages to make sure that custom blocks (videos, asides, emails, images, etc.) render correctly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After conversion, start your local TinaCMS site and browse the converted pages to make sure that custom blocks (videos, asides, emails, images, etc.) render correctly.
```

> ## Customizing the Script
> 
> The script is designed to be easy to extend:
> 
> * Add support for new content blocks by writing a new regex pattern and replacement function.
> * Modify how specific components are rendered.
> * Adjust how metadata (e.g., image captions or alt text) is parsed and used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Extending the Script

- Add new regex patterns for custom containers
- Modify JSX output to match your component APIs
- Tune parsing logic for edge cases or metadata
```

Author: ✅ Done
